
This is an implementation of the sha1 hash function in C, as specified by the [NIST FIPS 180-4](https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/fips/180/4/final) and unofficially verified using the methods provided in the [SHAVS](https://csrc.nist.gov/csrc/media/projects/cryptographic-algorithm-validation-program/documents/shs/shavs.pdf). Examples were pulled from the [NIST repositories](https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Projects/Cryptographic-Standards-and-Guidelines/documents/examples/SHA1.pdf) as well.

The full algorithm can be found in sha-1.c. The resulting *sha-1* program is meant for command-line use, accepting either a single file as a parameter with the -f option or a string of text input between quotation marks with the -t option. The output is the sha1 hash of the file or text. The program is not intended to be feature-rich, but rather a straightforward and understandable implementation of the algorithm for teaching and learning.

Verification can be found in the testing folder. The SHAVS outlines three tests to verify the validity of a sha1 implementation. The short-message test uses files of varying short length, while the long-message test uses files of varying longer length, to ensure the implementation works correctly with single-block messages and multi-block ones. The Monte-Carlo test uses some combination of the previous outputs of the hash function as the next input, and is used as the largest-scale test of the implementation for raw text. A fourth custom test was also done, called a file-zoo test, where a ludicrous number of tiny files are generated to ensure a large-scale test was also done for hashing files.

A few additional programs were used to verify the implementation. The program testing/files_equal tests whether two files given as arguments have equal contents. C programs were used to generate the files for the short-message, long-message, and file-zoo tests. A handful of bash scripts ran the tests themselves, outputting the result to corresponding .sha text files to be checked for file equality. Since officially verifying the implementation requires contacting the NIST and submitting a validation request as a company, the implementation was instead verified against the sha1sum (v8.30) program included in GNU coreutils.
